Mandrake Spyware Now Targeting Android Users in Australia
The spyware is capable of exploiting Google Chrome, Gmail, ANZ Australia, Bank of Melbourne Mobile Banking, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Bank of SA, Australian Super, and PayPal apps.
The threat actors behind the campaign have leveraged the rise in the usage of mobile banking in Australia to target individuals.

Security researchers reported a new Android spying operation subverting Google Chrome, Gmail, ANZ Australia, Bank of Melbourne Mobile Banking, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Bank of SA, Australian Super, and PayPal apps.

What happened?
A cybersecurity research team has uncovered the “Mandrake” spying operation targeting Australian mobile banking users.

Mandrake was first discovered earlier this year but is believed to be active since at least four years as a highly sophisticated spying platform.
The threat actors behind the campaign have leveraged the rise in the usage of mobile banking in Australia to target individuals.
One unusual factor observed by the researchers was that the attacks are manually orchestrated.
By analyzing their captured data, the research team could identify 500 victims from Australia so far. However, some experts have said that the number of targeted victims could be much higher.

How does the campaign work?
The well-developed Mandrake spyware has been continuously updated with new features, bug patches, and improved functionalities over a period of four years.

The threat actors involved are using the spyware to take on individual targets.
In this campaign, the spyware is used to first do a complete scan of the device and capture personal information about the targeted victim.
After this, the attackers gain access to the users' preferences, device usage, inactivity times, and have the ability to record their screens.

What are its capabilities?

Using the spyware, the attackers could do anything from credential stealing and information exfiltration, to money transfers and blackmailing.
It can also be used to surreptitiously turn the volume of the phone down and block calls or messages.
The researchers noted that the attackers might also be running an affiliate program to sell the victims' information or access to others.

Who is targeted?
The first attack wave from the threat actors was observed in 2016-2017 which was directed at targets in the UK, US, Germany, and the Netherlands.  The current wave of attacks from 2018-2020 is more focused on Australian users, with little presence in the US, Canada, and Europe.

According to the researchers, the spyware authors looked to be selectively targeting a "special kind of consumers." The researchers indicated that Australia may be a lucrative target for the attackers because of its high usage of mobile banking penetration and a high GDP per capita.